imagine the year is 1983 and you are a
Soviet military officer 1983 is a very
dangerous time to be well on earth the
Cold War is not feeling very cold
tensions between the United States and
the USSR are extremely high the messages
from politicians and the media sound
like a nuclear war would be terrible we
need to avoid it at all costs but the
Americans seem like they almost want it
to happen we need to make it seem like
we're willing to do it too just to keep
those crazy capitalist bastards from
trying anything and both sides are quite
successful in convincing the other that
they're willing to push the button maybe
too successful
NATO has deployed nuclear missiles in
Western Europe that can hit Soviet
targets within ten minutes and the USA
is running what it calls psychological
operations which involves flying large
fleets of aircraft almost into Soviet
airspace and then turning back at the
last minute with the goal of provoking a
Soviet response so that they can gather
intelligence about how the early warning
systems work what the protocols are how
the Soviets will respond to various
scenarios in April the most powerful
naval fleet ever assembled converges in
the North Pacific again trying to
provoke the USSR into reacting to learn
more about their defenses then on
September the 1st a South Korean
airliner flies over prohibited Soviet
airspace and is shot down the American
President Ronald Reagan appears on
television calling it a massacre and a
crime against humanity that must not be
forgotten the media on both sides
portray the other side as the aggressor
as itching to start a nuclear war the
relationship between the USA and the
USSR is well known to you it's a big
part of your job you are in charge of a
secure military facility near Moscow a
facility that's tasked with managing a
new state-of-the-art system of
satellites orbiting the earth 24 hours a
day looking for the tell-tale infrared
signature of a nuclear missile launch
it's the 26th of September around
midnight your job is important but it's
also very boring suddenly all of the
computers jump to life they've detected
a missile launch from the United States
sirens flashing lights everybody is out
of their seats the word start flashing
on the screen in
red letters you're the commanding
officer so you tell everyone to get to
their positions and await your orders
what are your orders
well you know the protocol you help
write it your job as the commanding
officer in this facility is in the event
of a launch detection to verify that the
report is accurate and then pass it on
up the chain of command so you do your
job first you make sure that the
computer is working properly you have
the technicians run through a set of
test procedures designed to verify that
the system isn't malfunctioning secondly
there's also a backup system which
involves human beings sitting in front
of monitors and looking at images from
these satellites so you ask them to
confirm the launch they come back and
say we don't know the Sun is setting
over the USA half the images bright half
is dark and the place the launch is
meant to have happened is right on the
Terminator between night and day it's
very difficult for us to see we can't
see the missile but if it was there we
probably wouldn't be able to see it
either we can't confirm or deny then the
computer room gets back to you they say
there's no malfunction in the system
everything is working as it should be
all of the tests on 30 levels have
passed the systems alerts come with an
Associated confidence rating and this
report has confidence level maximum the
computer operators tell you this is a
legitimate detection your job is now
unambiguous the protocol is clear the
system has confirmed a launch now your
job is to report that of the chain what
do you do this is all the information
you have you have the computer system
it's telling you there's a launch with
maximum confidence you have the visual
units who are telling you that they
don't know there's no way to get any
additional information the next thing
you can know about it will be when
Soviet ground-based radar stations pick
up the incoming missiles which would be
just a couple of minutes before impact
much too late to do anything about it
the clock is ticking what do you do you
know that because of the heightened
state of alert that the system is out
right now the Soviet policy is launched
on warning this means that the USSR will
launch a retaliatory strike without
first waiting for missiles to actually
hit by the time nuclear missiles are
striking their targets they'll be
destroying infrastructure destroying
your communication systems destroying
your ability to coordinate a retaliatory
strike if you don't react decisively and
immediately you don't react so the
system is set up to retaliate as soon as
a missile launches are detected
neutral knowledge of this fact is the
only known defense we've got so you know
that if you call in a verified missile
launch it will almost certainly start a
global thermonuclear war what do you do
you don't have much time to think and
while we're doing it the system
registers another launch a second
missile is detected again with maximum
confidence and again the visual units
can't confirm or deny before you can
decide what to do another missile
appears and another and another five
missiles show on your screen what do you
do this is of course a true story and
the man in this scenario was stun Aslam
Pat Roth and what Petrov does is he
stops and thinks he thinks something
like it could be a mistake but this
satellite system is extremely
sophisticated and carefully designed and
tested so a malfunction is very unlikely
on the other hand I don't think the USA
really wants a nuclear war they might
launch a preemptive nuclear strike
against us but that seems unlikely and
if they did want to attack first
wouldn't they throw everything at us an
attack that only uses five missiles as
possible but again unlikely he weighs up
the probabilities he picks up the phone
and contrary to protocol he calls it in
as a system error
false alarm there are no missiles
he says staring at the five missiles on
his screen and in the facility they wait
they don't have to wait long ICBMs are
fast they wait to hear the radar
stations detecting these incoming
missiles and a few minutes later when
the time comes the radar stations detect
nothing it was a false alarm it would
later be discovered that the satellite
system was confused by sunlight
reflecting off high-altitude clouds by
using his head by thinking by not
following the protocol stanislav petrov
single-handedly prevented hundreds of
millions of human deaths the destruction
of all of civilization effectively the
end of the world some of you probably
will have heard of him some of you
probably will not have because this
whole incident was somewhat embarrassing
for the soviet union it was embarrassing
that
satellite system had failed it was
embarrassing that all of their
sophisticated engineering had to be
saved by one individual person's
judgment and it was probably
embarrassing that one of their military
officers deliberately went against
protocol
anyway Petrov could not be rewarded
without his superiors being punished
so Petrov was not rewarded instead they
told him off for not filling out his
paperwork about the incident properly
and the whole thing had to be kept
secret for 10 years he couldn't even
tell his wife what happened before she
died and he retired to live alone on his
pension unsung until relatively recently
stanislav petrov died this year aged 77
he actually died back in May and we
didn't learn about it until this month
because nobody's really keeping in touch
there may come a day when people who
sing or act or play sports aren't as
famous as people who literally save the
entire goddamn world there may come a
day when people who win wars are not as
respected as people who prevent Wars
their day is not today
but maybe we can work towards it petrov
rejected the idea that he was a hero but
i disagree i think he's a hero to
everyone who values thinking for
yourself not buying into the hype not
being distracted by the noise of the
media anyone who values trying to see
things as they really are I think he's a
hero for everyone who values trying to
actually do your job to the best of your
ability rather than blindly following
the procedures you've been given and I
think he's a hero to anyone who values
not destroying the world which i think
is something we can all get behind so
today September 26th the anniversary of
his momentous decision I'll be
celebrating Petrov day the traditional
way to celebrate Petroff day is to not
destroy the world and I hope you'll all
join me in that and this Petrov day is
an unusual and historic and sad one
the first Petrov day with no Petrov in
the world he helped to save so let's try
to learn from him let's try to create a
world with more people like him let's
try to survive this century because we
still have vast Arsenal's of nuclear
weapons on a hair-trigger for some
stupid reason
and that might not even be the worst of
it
[Music]
[Applause]